The actual format of opening and closing brackets is specified with,
respectively, `--opening-bracket` and `--closing-bracket`. The
following expressions have a special meaning when given in
`--opening/closing-bracket` option:

  * `%T` - edge tags,
  * `%c` - edge category,
  * `%t` - edge text,
  * `%A` - all edge attributes,
  * `%a[...]` - the value of the given attribute,
  * `%s` - score,
  * `%*[...][...]`, `%*(...)(...)%`, `%*<...><...>` or
    `%*{...}{...}` - join operators (see below).

Let us call the elements of an edge description that were referred to
in the `--opening/closing-bracket` (but not inside join operators)
*active elements*. (E.g. for the specification `<edge tags="%T"
category="%c">` the tags and the category are active elements). Edges
covering the same span with same values of active elements will be
*collapsed* (i.e. only one bracket pair will be generated).

The alternative values of the elements of an edge description that are
not active can be given with a join operator. A join operator has two
arguments - a separator and the expression to be joined. Separator
cannot contain %-specification, the expression to be joined must
contain at least one %-specification. For instance the specification
`<%c text="%*[,][%t]>` means that for each category one bracket will
be generated, alternative text values will be separated with commas.

No more than one join operator can be given. Join operators can be,
hovewer, nested, e.g. `<%c>%*[][<text val="%t" attrs="%*(;)(%A)"/>]` is
acceptable.

The string that will substitute `%T` is obtained by joining tags with
commas. An alternative separator can be given with `--tag-separator`.
The tag names that will appear in `%T` substitions can be limited with
the `--show-only-tags` options, if `--filter` is specified and
`--show-only-tags` was not given, the `--filter` will be assumed for
`--show-only-tags`.

The string that will substtitue `%A` is obtainted by joining the
attribute-value pairs with commas. An alternative separator can be
given with `--av-pairs-separator` option. The attribute and its value
are separated with `=`, an alternative separator can be given with
`--av-separator`. The attribute to be shown can be chosen with the
`--show-attributes` option.
